Go ahead.
Well, as we agree, it's impossible to serve two monsters.
And it would have been impossible to write this book if I hadn't taken two years unpaid leave from my teaching.
And this was at where?
I teach at Oxford at the sole remaining woman's college, St.
Hilda's College.
Oxford figures prominently in my book.
Do you know Colin Franklin?
I never know anybody.
I've lived a very quiet life.
Anyway, I'm sorry.
Well, it was very unpopular things to do in college because the English form of democracy is that nobody should have advantages anybody else doesn't have.
But I was just determined to take off that time.
And when was this?
This was from about 1990 to 92.
And had you started the project?
I'd just started it, and after I went back into full-time teaching,
I did, you know, two years of more work than rebellion.
But Oxford, well, the bulk of the book was done in the two years unpaid leave.
But then... The writing end of it or the actual research?
The writing.
The writing and research.
I sort of do the two together because...
Well, it just works for me to do research when, to write when the research is done.
And I think that access to materials was good.
I think you're in the right place.
Oh, yes.
You didn't really have to do a good job.
Well, I did come to America.
There are Charlotte Bronte materials in America, but the main materials are at the Harvest Parsonage, at the Bronte Parsonage Museum, and it's not so easy because it's still very inaccessible.
It takes five hours by train from Oxford.
Really?
You can fly across the Atlantic.
I know you can fly across the country.
Yes, so it's not so accessible.
But one advantage is that Oxford vacations are long.
It's called the long, the summer vacation.
And then our terms are only eight weeks.
So I've always been able to, in that way, my post hasn't been as bad as some people's.
Every eight weeks, you have a six-week vacation, which is long enough to write a chapter.
So let's use this as an entry point, then.
Yes.
Because there have been a number of studies written on the subject, what really persuaded you that this was a subject at then?
Well, in a way, I began this book by accident.
I have written critical biographies before, and because I'm very interested in the links between life and work, the transmutation of life into work, and therefore I've particularly chosen autobiographical subjects, I'm also interested in women writers and women's lives.
I was then to write a book called Lives for Women, which was then to be a series of short biographies... Explain, pardon me, just to say autobiographical subjects.
Yes, I've chosen, I've written about T.S.
Eliot and Virginia Woolf and now Charlotte Bronte.
But using their own... Well, because they are very autobiographical, and there are drafts of their material, it's quite, their lives, the links between their lives and works are interesting.
It's a very interesting way that you do this.
You're writing as a biographer, but writing about...
autobiographical subject, which I think is very interesting.
So that you can get very close to the creative act.
But I do think when you write about writers, one's got to see that the work was the center of their lives.
And to skirt the work is, I think, a falsification of what was so intensely important to them.
And I think it's terribly interesting to get close, you get very close to what Henry James called the private life, which is almost the set-apart life of the writer, something
quite distinct from the public appearances.
I mean, in Charlotte Bronte, her public appearances were very mousy.
I mean, she had to conform in the middle of the 19th century to a construct of womanhood as very quiet, very modest, very mousy.
But if you listen to the voice of her writings, she's the antithesis of this.
She's volcanic, fiery, passionate, and very professional.
It's very important that I think that she is a professional wife.
She is professional.
At that point.
And that she did partly through games she had with her brother when they were children, in that they, at the Howard Partridge Museum, they had minute little booklets which they invented together.
They had fantasies together.
And they were very professionally done.
They were playing a game of publication where they had
title pages and contents and they signed their work.
You know, they were very concerned with being writers in the future.
Amazing, isn't it?
It is.
Especially a lot of mothers.
Yes, no mother, no mother.
What was in this father that motivated all of these?
I think that it was almost for the girls, for the Bronte women, it was almost in secret from their father.
He knew nothing about their writing until
Charlotte Bronte went to confess it after the great success of Jane Eyre and she realised he was getting very close to home and Jane Eyre was circulating in Yorkshire and people were talking.
But he really, like a traditional Victorian father, really only took interest in his son's development.
His son was very brilliant, very talented, but somehow went off the rails.
It happened.
You mentioned the James family.
I mean, you had William and Henry, who were wonderful, and then you had Alice, who was brilliant.
Yes, brilliant, but not... But then you had those two other sons, which you totally rejected.
Well, I think that's a different story.
I mean, that's a very interesting story in that those two youngest ones went to war, went to the Civil War, and didn't regret them, encouraged by their father.
And their father let off the two older ones.
And the younger one, I believe,
He hated it and wanted to come home, and his father said, you stick it and be a man.
I mean, it must have destroyed them.
There's a wonderful, I haven't read it yet, I don't know if it's wonderful instead of the reviews, but there's a biography of Henry Sr.
that's just been published.
Oh, I would love to read that.
Ferris Strauss.
Oh, I must read it.
I just got my review copy of it last week.
Oh, I will get that, because I'm very keen on the dream.
Really strong review on me.
You know Justin Kaplan is doing a biography of William right now, would you change?
Yes.
This is about a half a mile from here, isn't it?
I'm sorry, you don't mind jumping around a little bit?
No, not at all, not at all.
But to get back on track here where you were about your decision to write about him.
Oh yes, sorry, I didn't answer that question.
I was going to write a book called Life for Women because I wanted to get away from the big tome.
I didn't believe in that.
so-called definitive biography.
I think it's an illusion.
Well, there probably isn't one.
There's no such thing as definitive biography, I believe, but it's a delusion of the marketplace.
There's no last word on any life.
I think when you enter the canon, as Charlotte and I certainly have, you have to have a new interpretation every generation.
Every generation.
Because what I've tried to do is write a biography.
Well, I'm interested in women's lives and seeing them
from the perspective of right now, where we're interested in strength, you know, and resilience and resource.
And I was going to do then a series of shorter biographies where I would just try and distill something very central.
And then when I began working on Charlotte Bronte, that was the first of a series, I began to see that I was seeing her differently and treating her differently from previous
They're excellent biographies of Charlotte Bronte.
She's been well served, starting with Mrs. Gaskell in the 19th century.
She was commissioned, actually.
Mrs. Gaskell was commissioned by the family.
But she wrote a wonderful biography.
It'll live always.
But it was Charlotte Bronte for the Victorians.
What do they call a Valentine with Valentine's Day coming next week?
No, no, I think that that doesn't do justice to the fact that she does show a living woman she knew, but she wanted to bring forward the visible Charlotte Bronte who was
quietly suffering, sort of shivering in the shadow of tombstones.
It was a picture of a life of desolation.
I'm actually quoting this in Guskell's words.
She begins with a row of tombstones.
And the Victorians, of course, relished death.
And she's showing, when she shows you this row of tombstones, i.e.
one Bronte died after another, this is all true.
And she's saying, all right, I'm taking the scene for a tragedy about a doomed family.
And this was Bronte legend.
that developed this doomed family roaming over the moors.
And right up till now, it's got tremendous hold on people's imagination.
The whole thing is a romantic myth.
And what I want to do, the vogue now in Bronte scholarship is to actually be much more realistic and down to earth, to see these as people who weren't so lonely.
They were living in the middle of Yorkshire, and they were very class-ridden.
Mr. Bronte changed his class in 10 years.
He was an Irish peasant who became a gentleman.
And they were very prickly, his daughters, about their status as the daughters of gentlemen.
That's why that made them very tense when they went out as governesses.
It's now considered all wrong to separate them from the context of the society in which they lived.
You mentioned a new interpretation.
I know one or two of the reviewers have said this is a revisionist biography.
Do you accept that?
I've been asked this before, and I'm not quite sure what's meant by the word revisionist.
Nor do I, but this was a reviewer, it was either the New York Times or the Washington Post reviewer, I think, who used this expression.
Well, does it mean that I'm offering a very different interpretation?
Well, I am offering a different interpretation in that... But you don't necessarily accept that... Well, I think it... You see, I wouldn't accept it in that Mrs. Gaskell, I feel, did tell a great truth about Charlotte Brontë, and she's influenced all other biographies up to now, which is that this was a life of desolation and suffering, and she presented an idea, an image of pathos.
And this was supposed to redeem the Victorian idea.
The hostility to Charlotte Bronte, although she was extremely successful, she also boasts a lot of hostility because of her passion and vehement.
The Victorians called her cause.
Now, what I want to do is to bring forward the invisible Charlotte Bronte, the writer.
I'm putting her work at the center of her life, and I'm also trying to open up the gaps.
It's so easy to do a seamless biography because there are so many facts, but many
papers were destroyed at the time of her death.
I think it's very important to point out this expression, opening up the gaps you've used, and it's very important.
You're not really trying to uncover new factual information about the woman and to any great, are you?
Yes.
One thing, for instance, is I've told in great detail a story of another relationship.
I mean, she had two
one might say loves in her life before her happy marriage to her father's purist.
Well, first of all, what's well known is that she fell in love with a married man, her French teacher in Brussels.
And that was a reckless, quite destructive love in some ways, but quite indefinable.
I've tried to reinterpret that in that I don't think it falls into easy categories of crush or affair.
I think it was very important that he recognised her genius and that he
He offered to know her, and he refined her work.
But I've told something new about the other relationship, which was a long relationship with her young publisher, George Smith, who was to become the preeminent publisher in the Victorian period, and he was obeying Prinsley.
And the whole tone of that relationship
Again, it's an indefinable relationship.
Do you see any parallels at all?
I mean, you know the Emily Dickinson story that we have.
Yes.
Yes, I do.
And it just has almost the same kind of... Yes, because again, you see, with Emily Dickinson and what the man she called Martha, I mean, again, well, we know very much less about that, of course, but it's, I would say, an indefinable relationship.
She wrote an awful lot of letters.
She wrote her letters.
She also, you see, like Charlotte Bronte adopts,
a public persona, which she plays.
I mean, her daisy persona is not terribly engaging to us in the 20th century because it feels very twee, you know, and I don't know if you know that English word.
How would we spell that word?
Twee.
T-W-E-E in English.
I could wrestle with that on my tape for hours.
It's all coy and arch.
It's not a tone that 20th century women use.
And we've got to be sympathetic, I suppose, to 19th century women who
had to play some of the games of their time.
But, I mean, it's obviously a momentous volcanic relationship, and not important, except insofar as it provokes, obviously, very great poetry, and she's transforming it, whatever it was, into something marvelous.
You don't mind my jumping around?
Not at all.
Because I make sense out of this.
No, I think that it's terribly interesting that both Emily Dickinson, who was a great admirer of the Brontes, when I looked, I actually, here at Harvard in the, I don't know how to pronounce it, the Houghton Library?
Houghton.
In the Houghton Library where they have the Emily Dickinson page.
Very nice, that's Houghton.
They have the Emily Dickinson papers.
I looked at her books, and she had everything the Brontes published, especially she admired Emily Brontes, of course, the poet.
But I think that she felt the boldness of the Brontes, and I think she was even more daring in the way she broke up language.
Did you go into the kids' room at the Houghton Library?
No.
They have a life mask of kids.
I mean, which is very interesting.
I mean, I get shivers.
I mean, death masks are easy, but... Life masks.
But this was a life mask taken.
I mean, he died at 29.
It was a remarkable collection of cute stuff right there.
That was wonderful figures, because, of course, I worked there on the Eliot papers that I was working on.
Figures very prominently in my book.
Well, I'll tell you a little bit about it when we're done, if you'd like.
Right, I would like to, yes.
Because it really is about... Let's talk about the plantes again.
Where were we?
You were asking me what I added to... Well, what you hoped to add.
And I think that this book is impossible without letters, right?
I mean, letters are essential.
And what you see, there isn't... I mean, one of the extraordinary things is that there isn't, as yet, a collected edition of Charlotte Bronte's letters.
I mean, they were so...
I mean, that's a whole scandal of the late 19th century.
They were scattered far and wide.
And it's been very hard to... The man she married, Arthur Bell Nichols, her father's purit, was terribly...
came to a whole Bronte material close to the chest, and he disappeared into the wilds of Ireland.
Well, that happens so often, doesn't it?
I know, and he lived on and on into the century.
He only died in 1906.
And you think that stuff is missing, or you think it's very... Well, no, no, he did.
He handed it over to a scholar adventurer who was a rogue.
But you think a lot of it is missing?
Well, papers were actually deliberately destroyed at the time of her death because she was thought of as course.
And her close friends,
Her two great women friends destroyed letters.
Ellen Massey destroyed some, but she kept the bulk of them, and we're very lucky.
But her feminist friend, Mary Taylor, destroyed a great deal of letters.
So what do you think we lost in this?
Well, I think I was trying to say about Mary Taylor.
Mary Taylor was a woman who, from her adolescence, when she met Charlotte Bronte at school, was very concerned about the economic position of women.
And I think that she and Charlotte Bronte would have had a feminist exchange.
Mary Taylor wanted to found a business, and women couldn't found businesses in the 1830s, in England, 1840s, so she emigrated to New Zealand.
She was one of the first immigrants.
And she founded her business, made money, and came back and retired in England.
But there was no way that...
well, what was one going to do about this gap in Charlotte Bronte's life?
Mary Taylor thought these were dangerous letters in 1855 when Charlotte Bronte died.
And she later said she regretted destroying their correspondence.
But what does remain, and what I have used, is that at the time Charlotte Bronte finished her most feminist novel, Shirley, which she sent to New Zealand to Mary Taylor.
Mary Taylor does one letter's expense.
Mary Taylor replies,
She's actually in this novel.
Her family's in this novel.
And she says, you've got us exactly.
I can see our home.
She's depicted in this novel as a proto-feminist child, a rebellious child who's got thoughts her mother never thought.
And she reveals to Charlotte she's writing a novel.
And this novel survives.
It was published.
Miss Miles.
And it's a very feminist novel.
And it's been published.
recently by Oxford University Press republished.
How does it read?
Well, I found it quite readable.
It's not read in that Mary Taylor was an activist, a doer.
She was a businesswoman.
So she's not profound as Charlotte Bronte is.
On the other hand, she gives a portrait of what it was like.
She actually subtitles it life 60 years ago because it's only...
eventually published in 1890 so she's writing about women's lives in the 1830s when she and charlotte were young so i've drawn on that novel to try and get an atmosphere of what she and charlotte were concerned about let's make a comment if we if we might it's important i mean the story is fascinating just even if she's not charlotte blonte i mean
But she is.
Let's talk a little bit about, you know, the importance of the writing, too.
Are you going to say it isn't Charlotte Bronte?
I'm sorry?
Are you saying that that for a portrait isn't Charlotte Bronte?
No, I'm saying it is, absolutely.
But what makes it—no, no, no, I hope that wasn't suggested.
No, I'm saying the fact that she's such—her work resonates to this day.
You're talking about this other novel that you just read, and it's not so deep, but it retails.
This particular woman, her work is probably not likely to survive through generations.
Yes, Charles Brandt, of course, a much greater artist.
Which really justifies this effort.
I guess that's just a comment on my part.
No, that's all right.
But interestingly, her work has been republished, this particular novel, because
Again, it speaks to... I mean, it was a novel published in 1890, and this is a century later, but it still does speak to women, I imagine.
Right around the time Emily Dickinson's stuff is coming out, too.
You know, interesting.
It's 1890.
Is it?
Interesting time.
But Emily Dickinson came out in such an odd form.
I mean, so selected.
Well, it was posthumous.
And she was being fiddled with by editors.
They attempted to regularise her.
I mean, it took a long time for Emily Dickinson's greatness to be recognized.
I think so, and it's still being evaluated.
I think she's very great, very bold.
And I'm so full of admiration for these mid-nineteenth-century women writers who had to be so bold.
much bolder than we have to be.
I mean, just the fact that they have to assume a masculine pinnake.
Yes.
And, of course, Emily Dickinson doesn't publish at all.
Not at all.
Maybe half a dozen poems.
Which was heard from her, as you said.
Very interesting.
What did you learn in this process, in this procedure, through doing this book yourself, about the creative process?
You talk about being really motivated to get a sense of the creative process, not just a biography of the individual.
Are you talking about, what did I learn, biography?
Well, all of the above.
Take it anywhere you want.
Or about the subject.
How about the subject, I guess, primarily was the question.
Well, I don't think that... I'm going to say anything now that would surprise people who've read her novels.
I think that those people who are immersed in her novels will know that this is a very strong, passionate, vehement person behind that facade of being sort of meek and quiet and modest and dutiful.
I mean, she was meek and quiet.
I mean, she was modest and dutiful.
But when I read the letters, she talks repeatedly of my natural home character, as though this is something completely different from her public character.
And that natural home character, in her own terms,
is somebody who's articulate, laughing, sarcastic and she's got a mind of her own and I suppose I very much enjoyed living with somebody who was so honest who spoke her mind with a kind of Yorkshire vigour and she admired vigour and I admired her professionalism too so in some ways
I'm saying something that wouldn't be awfully surprising to people who know the Bronte as well, but would be surprising to people who have always assumed that the Bronte legend is accurate.
I'm sorry.
We have written a number of books about writers, important writers.
Yes.
I've got a couple of thoughts.
Yes, right.
Going back to the letters that we were talking about earlier, in general, this kind of a book is impossible for writers today, don't you think?
We don't really reveal as much about ourselves through correspondence.
Well, perhaps there isn't so much correspondence because we use telephone.
I understand it, but I mean...
Having said that, I still wonder if a biographer, you know, 50 years, 75 years from now, would be able to... What a goldmine it is to have access to letters.
I'm just wondering, say, Flannery O'Connor.
I thought she was one of the great writers of letters.
Of course, now I'm thinking of Elizabeth Bishop's letters, which just came out last year.
I haven't read those.
Wonderful.
Now, Flannery O'Connor's letters are the dependence.
And you see, you have a situation there that's in a way similar to the Bronte's because she's living distanced from people with whom she has to communicate.
And she's, because of illness in Flannery O'Connor's case, she's shut off there in the South in a sort of intellectual wasteland.
And she's writing letters to the people who are intellectuals and important in her life.
And she reveals a great deal about herself and her art.
and shows herself to be terribly impressive.
Talk a bit.
Here we are in the late 20th century, and we've had many decades of Freudian analysis and all this, and Freudian biography, and here we're dealing with a decidedly Victorian 19th century woman who reveals herself in ways that people today might never would be...
Tell me the responsibility that you feel as a biographer.
I mean, do you... Yes.
All right.
I think... No.
I don't like the term psychobiography, and I don't use any particular formula when I do this, because I'm very suspicious of all categories and all doctrines.
I feel it's very dangerous to bring a grid, you know, of a particular angle and put it down on the subject.
I've actually got a very demanding idea about biography,
In a way, Henry James, an idea, you know, he uses this phrase, the pattern in the carpet.
There's this idea that every writer, if you read, I mean, a significant writer will have a pattern that will speak right through the work.
And T.S.
Eliot spoke of pattern as well.
In fact, I got the idea first from Eliot and then saw it in Henry James.
And Yeats confirms it.
If you look at the great writers, they're telling you this again and again.
Yeats said, a great writer is not the muddle most of us are when we sit after breakfast is being reborn as an idea, something intended, complete.
It's a wonderful statement.
It's suggesting that a great life, an immortal life, is driven by a preconceived idea.
Henry James says art makes life, makes important.
So they don't live as we do in this sort of bungling way from day to day.
They're very directed.
And I think that when you do a biography,
You've got to know what you're doing before you begin, in the sense that you've got to have an idea what is the pattern in the carpet of this particular writer.
Say, in T.S.
Eliot's case, it was the trajectory of the religious life, a very simple pattern, which he got from his grandfather and his mother.
And, you know, it's the simple pattern of the toiling, of pilgrim's progress, of the toiling through ordeal towards some hopes of sublimity, or
trying to construct your life as a vessel for the divine spirit to fill.
And that very simple pattern, when I saw it in Eliot's life, I saw veritive and all the manuscripts confirmed it.
And he constructed his life to fit that pattern as far as it could, although he was a very flawed human being.
But one had to respect the fact that he struggled with his flaws.
In a very New England way, I've written about him as very much somebody who came out of that strenuous New England tradition.
acutely aware of Puritan forebear.
Anyway, well I'm giving you one example because with Eliot the pattern was so clear.
And so that what I'm trying to say is as a biographer you see that pattern and then you've actually got to, in other words you lend yourself to a particular writer and you devise a form for that biography that is dictated by that writer.
So I don't have a formula that I would use for
say all biographies, and I'm certainly swerving away from the sort of plot from pedigree to grave, where you just do a chronology.
And another sort of guideline for myself, as well as Yates, came from Virginia Woolf, an essay I read actually when I was an undergraduate in Cape Town.
She wrote an essay called The Art of Biography.
I didn't know then I'd be a biographer, but I was very impressed with this essay.
And she said that
If biography is going to move towards an art and not just be, you know, a plodding genre, you have to distinguish between the barren fact and the fact that suggests and engenders.
So she's suggesting selection of fact, selection for the live, beating centre of the life, instead of, you know, going to the dentist and, you know, even Leanne Adele, I found it very tedious, that at the end of his multi-volume biography, he does the deathbed in such great detail,
And yet James's mind was wandering, you know, and I think it's demeaning that he says, oh, there his head was lolling up and shaven about its brownie aged blanket.
I mean, that wasn't James the master.
You know, that was James already almost dead.
And how relevant was it?
And it's not relevant to the man who wrote those subtle, you know.
I like the abridged, you read the multivolum one, which was, you know, really...
But I thought that would be... Abridged was better.
There was one guy.
I don't think he's such a good reader of the novel.
And I think he's got too much... It's so important, isn't it?
I think we haven't even touched on that.
I mean, we talk about coming into the subject.
Do you come in with any... I hate to use the word preconception, but do you come with a... And I won't use the word bias, but you certainly come in with an attitude.
Well, I'm coming with an attitude that I'm interested in
The private life.
You've certainly got some opinions.
I've got opinions about biography that are the result of writing it.
About the subject as well, perhaps.
About the subject as well, question mark.
I've got opinions about the biography and, you know, about the subject.
As I said, I'm moving away from... I don't believe in the objectivity of pure record, not in history, not in literature.
I mean, it's there in science, but...
I think that's a delusion.
There's always a subject.
But you certainly look for the life and the work as well, though.
Yes, I'm interested in the interconnections of the life and the work.
And I don't think that it's illegitimate to read back from the work to the life.
In fact, I've been asked to speak in New York and at Columbia about the autonomy of art and the responsibilities of the biographer.
I've been actually given that subject obviously because I don't... I think that you can recognise the autonomy of art, say, with Eliot.
And at the same time, I think it only deepens one's understanding of the work of art if you understand that art is a product of a time, a place, a particular individual, and that the personal concerns that go into the work coexist with what is impersonal and timeless.
in the work.
But I think we're moving much more, I mean, talking from an academic perspective, academe's moving much, much more now into an acceptance of sort of the historical moment, the historicity of a work.
Now, how about when you're engaged in this process?
Does Charlotte, I mean, it sounds almost like
a silly question, but does she really come alive for you?
I mean, do you sit down with her in the morning?
Well, I don't think it would be appropriate to identify.
I mean, I think that people who gravitate into the Bronte society often fantasize they're one Bronte or another, and I wouldn't want to be like that.
I think that
It's as simple as reading.
But this is not a clinical approach, on the other hand.
It's not a clinical... The way I think one should read seriously is that you've got to lend yourself to somebody.
There's some kind of active imaginative sympathy, so you see somebody on his or her own terms.
But I also think then you've got to stand back and judge.
Say with T.S.
Eliot,
He's, as I said, a very flawed person, but also very admirable in his striving off to the religious side.
So that I did try and lend myself to him and see him on his own terms.
But at the same time, as a woman, I had to stand back and see that he treated women very deviously, because he fed them into his papers, ruthlessly.
They were what he... Yes.
So that...
There was a Bostonian woman, Emily Hale.
I brought out that whole story of a long relationship with this woman.
It was perfectly proper, but he kept her under wraps.
And he calls her the Lady of Silences.
In his poetry, he constructs her as a Beatrice figure, as Beatrice was for Dante, which actually she was articulate, a teacher of drama.
I mean, she was different in real life.
And I tried very... I mean, I stood back from Elliot to give her her voice.
so that she had justice done to her as well.
And I saw her as a secret sharer in Eliot's life, and I think that it's very important not to lend oneself so completely to a writer that you can't see them as others do, though.
I was so disappointed to see how quickly people were ready to, like Thackeray, for instance, you know.
Yeah.
She was hot stuff for a while, but then all of a sudden, when the vibrations went another way... Yes.
Well, Zachary was a very traditional, old-fashioned man.
I wanted to get a little more courage, though, maybe a little more, you know... Well, he was rather awful, in that he didn't like it.
He liked women who were sort of softly feminine, who flattered him, and, you know, he put her down a lot.
It is a shame, because she was ready to admire him.
Do you see tragedy in her life?
Yes.
Of course.
I mean, I've tried to keep that tragedy in view at all times.
But I think people who subscribe to the Bronte legend like to feel, oh, she wasn't so different from us because look how weak she was, how she suffered.
She suffered as we would suffer.
But actually, I have to say she wasn't like us because she had the strength to turn lost again in a way most of us don't.
She had the strength to turn lost again, I think.
Yes.
You see, she had terrible tragedies, more than most of us have to endure, with all the deaths.
But one example I gave in the book is when the last of her siblings died, Anne Bronte, in 1849, and she takes Anne at Anne's request for a last look at the sea on the Scarborough coast, and Anne died then, and she and her great friend Ellen, very Anne.
What a scene.
Now, the New York Times book reviewer gave me a very nice
review said why didn't I pull out more stops at that point and she does say very tragic things in her letters about how she's suffering but what I wanted to bring out was also strength not just that she was knocked over because she wasn't totally she did something most of us couldn't do before she got back to Harworth she went in for a great burst of creative writing and what she did was she was at a point in her novel Shirley where the heroine you know you're one of those
19th century scenes of mortal illness and the heroine at the last minute, like Beth in Little Women, pulls through.
And she poured her experience of that deathbed of Anne into that scene immediately while it was hot.
It's fantastic to read.
And because it was a Victorian novel, the heroine had to survive and get married.
But the vehement of her experience is just burning in that scene.
And then she writes to her editor in London,
Now, work saved me when I was thinking.
Its results cheer me now.
Isn't that brave?
Now, you see, that's not like the rest of us.
And she packed so much into 39 years, too.
Amazing, yes.
And also, the way she kept saying she was plain, and people in the Victorian period tell us she was plain,
I don't think she looks plain.
There's one picture you have in here in profile, which I think is... She looks sensible.
I know the one you mean.
Not unattractive?
Not unattractive.
So, that too is... I mean, I don't know why she presents herself as so plain and why she is seen to be so plain, and it has to do with the taste of a particular era.
I thought women had to... She was always very thin.
Maybe if we knew more about the father at this point, it would help.
Maybe it would.
Yes, he didn't take much interest in his daughter's talents.
And his own work's really mediocre.
And it's unbearably boring.
I mean, it would be interesting to know why she felt that.
I mean, I have to think there were some other factors at work out there.
Well, actually, it wasn't her... She was told she was played by her feminist friend, Mary Taylor, who later apologized.
Thanks, Mary.
Right.
Thanks.
Very nice.
Yeah.
I'm sorry, U.S.
Stewart, I interrupted you.
No, no, no, no.
Do go on ahead and look at the things you wanted to offer.
Gina, all right, if you don't mind, this is always a good one.
There was a man from Oxford who actually, it's very rare for people to be dismissed from their jobs.
But he came to Princeton.
He's a medieval Latin, medieval Latin is his subject.
And he's, I mean, a tip-top in his field.
And he went to Princeton and he stole books from Princeton Library.
Now, his psychology, and I'm guessing... Is he American?
No, he's English.
Originally New Zealand, I think.
But his psychology would be, I am the most brilliant person in this field.
Nobody else wants these books in medieval Latin.
I'm the scholar of the world.
And nobody else can appreciate them, therefore I should have them.
Were these printed books or manuscripts?
I'm afraid I don't know.
But he was discovered.
He's lost his job at Oxford, and he's now, I won't say where, but he's found a job in another country.
Well, it's a problem that's endemic, actually.
I mean, the guy I write about is the bizarre example, but the greatest threat is the insider.
The insider who thinks he's... Well, who knows, but also knows how to do it, and can hide, and can destroy the records.
I have a case of a guy down in Georgia who was stealing stuff,
selling it and destroying the records so there was never any they have no idea what you mean they're such good operators and they're insiders and they know that they just discovered 22 missing manuscripts of columbia this summer a couple months ago i think i've got it in my book oh well then you've got lots of stories about this hundreds of stories but british stuff is terrific and i think that there'll be terrific interest in my book well you must tell your publishers that they must
find a way of getting it out into the bookshops in England.
I think it could do very well.
We're looking for a British publisher, you know.
Tell us briefly, is this your ride over here?
No, I don't.
No.
Well, I wanted to go to Bert Norton, the scene of Eliot's, one of his quartets, and although there were photographs in existence of
Burt Norton.
They were flat.
They didn't give one the feeling of the poem.
And I wanted to photograph that scene with the poem in my mind.
So I lay on the grass.
I went at the right time of the year.
I tried to angle the camera just so that I could get that optical illusion, what Elliot perceived as a miracle of water rising out of an empty pool with the sunlight coming through the leaves.
And I had to wait for that little moment, which is so rare in England, where you get that play of light
Lights moving in England all the time because of clouds.
Which time of day did you shoot it?
In the afternoon, and it was September, and the roses had to be in bloom, the second blooming of roses, which comes in the late summer, and it somehow had to do with his time of life, where it was a story of renewal and of renewed love and of also love passing beyond its object because it was a religious poem as well.
And he went to this garden with this woman, Barstony and Emily Hale.
And he had once proposed to her in 1914 before he left for England, and she turned him down.
And then after a very unhappy marriage, she came to England for two years, and they renewed their tithes.
So you got the picture?
And he took it to the back.
So all that was in my mind when I had to take this picture.
I got it.
Did you shoot this one in colour?
In black and white always because I knew the publishers want black and white.
Yeah, but they can, you know.
Can they take colour?
Oh, yeah.
No, but I wanted to get my eye through the black and white.
That play of light was so important because it had to, you had to, the pool that Eliot describes in the poem, you would never guess that it's as big as a swimming pool.
And it's very hard for one to imagine a miracle thing.
because it looks so bland, like an empty swimming pool.
And I had to try very hard to get the play of light on the pool so that it would look full of water.
That's great.